
In this video, we're going to continue our
discussion of the construction of
[laugh](1) parsing tables by taking a look
at how we build the follow sets. So here's
the definition of follow of x, and recall
that the follow set for a given symbol in
the grammar isn't really about what that
symbol can generate, really, doesn't
depend necessarily at all on what the
symbol can generate. It depends on where
that symbol can appear, where that symbol
is used in the grammar. And we say that t
is in the follow of x if there is some
place in the grammar, some derivation,
where that terminal t can appear
immediately after the symbol x. Okay, so
for all such. E. They make up the follow
set of x. And here's some intuition about
how we would compute follow sets. Let's
say we have a situation where X goes to
two symbols A, B, right? And then anything
that B can produce in the first position
will clearly be in the follow of A. So if
we have X goes to AB. And then through
some more, steps, we can get something
like, this A goes, B goes to T beta, then
we have a situation where the T comes
immediately after the A, and so clearly,
something that was in the first of B, is
in the follow of A. So, so the basic rule
is that you have two symbols that are
adjunct somewhere, the first of the second
one is in the follow of the first one. Hm,
now Another interesting effect here is
that, if we have, a symbol at the end of a
production. Let's take a look at the B
here for a moment, okay? And a claim here
that anything that's in the follow of the
left hand side is gonna be in the follow
of B. In this case, that the follow of X
is a subset of the follow of B. And let's
take a look at that. Let's say that we
have, a situation where we have a
derivation from the start symbol, okay? We
wind up with X followed by T. It can, it
can be other stuff around the [inaudible]
let's ignore that for the moment, let's
just focus on the XT. Then we can use this
production X goes to AB and in one step we
can get to ABT. And then we see T was in
the follow of X a nd also, T is in the
follow of B as a result, Okay. So,
anything in the follow of X would also be
in the follow of B. And we can generalize
this observation about what occurs at the
end of a production. So anything that
occurs at the end of the production, it,
its follow set will include the follow set
of the symbol on the left hand side of the
production. Well, what is the end of the
production? If, if B can go to epsilon, if
B can disappear, then A will appear at the
end of the production. Okay, so if B can
go to epsilon, then it will also happen
that the follow of X, would be in the
follow of A. And following up here in our
example, so we. Or up here we start with
the start symbol. We got to XT. In one
step we got to ABT and so T was in the
follow of B. But now, B can go into
epsilon and so we can also get to AT and
therefore T is also in the follow of A.
And finally there's one special case.
Remember that we have our special symbol
marking the end of the input, and what can
that follow? Well the end of the input is
in the follow of the start symbol,
alright? And this is just a way again of
keeping track of what we're going to do
when we run out of input. And we'll see
how that's used when we built the parsing
tables but we always add as an initial
condition, that dollar sign is in the
follow of the start symbol. So now, let's
take a look at and sketch of the algorithm
for computing follows. So that's, as we
just said, the dollar sign is in the
follow of the start symbol. And now we
take a look at each production. Okay, A
goes to alpha X beta, we're, we're
focusing here on the X. Okay, if we look
at every production and we look at every
symbol on the right hand side of that
production. And the first of beta, okay,
the thing that can follow x in this in
this production, the first of that will be
in the follow of x, and also we just
subtract out epsilon if it was in the
first sub-beta. We're not interested
anymore in the epsilons for the purposes
of follow sites, epsilon never appears in
follow sites, so follow sites are always
just sets of terminals. And now the second
part of the algorithm is it if we have
some suffix of a production beta that can
go to Epsilon, so Epsilon is in the first
beta. Alright, this suffix of the
production can completely disappear, then
as we saw on the previous slide the follow
of left hand side symbol will be in the
follow of X. And that's it in terms of the
rules for computing follow sets. So now
let's work through an example. So here's
our grammar again. And we're going to
compute, the follow sets for each of the
symbols of the grammar. So let's begin,
with the, with the start symbol. We'll
start with the follow of E. And by
definition, we know that dollar is in the
follow of E. So we get that one easily.
And now the question is what else could be
in the follow of E, Alright? So in order
to figure that out we have to look at
where E is used in the grammar, Alright?
So remember always at follow sets are
about where the symbol is used. Not what
it produces. Alright? So here. Is a place
where E is used, and we can see that it is
merely followed by a terminal symbol, so
certainly close paren is in the follow of
E, right? And there's one other place
where E is used, and that's over here. And
it appears that the right end of the
production, and so then we know that
anything that's in the follow of X is also
gonna be in the follow of E. And that's a
constraint, and so we'll right that down
over here 'coz this is just a property of
the relationship. That the follow sets,
will have when we're done computing them.
This doesn't immediately tell us anything
new that's in the follow of E. But we know
that as we go along, and we learn about
things that are in the follow of X, we'll
have to add them to the follow of E. And
let me just divide up. The slide here so
we will put our properties that we know
about relationships between fallocates
over on the left hand side and we'll put
the actual fallocates over here on the
right side. So, now to make, that's the
only two places, those are the only two pl
aces where E is used in the grammar and to
make further progress we need to know
something about the follow of X. Okay, if
we want to make further progress on the
follow of E then we need to figure out
what's in the follow of X. So, let's focus
on that for a minute. So, where's X used
in the grammar, well it's used in only one
place and that's here, Okay? Where it
appears at the right end of a production.
And what, and so therefore, the symbol on
the left hand side will be a subset of the
follow set of X. So we're gonna know that
the follow of E is a subset of the follow
of X. Alright? And what does that mean?
Well, so follow of X is a subset of follow
of E. And follow of E is a subset of the
follow of X. So that really means that
these two sets are equal. The follow of X
and the follow of E, whatever they wind up
being, are gonna have to be the same set.
And now we've looked at all the places
where E is used in the grammar. We've
looked at all the places where X is used
in the grammar. We can't learn anything
more about what is in the sets, the follow
sets of E and X. We're not forced to add
anything else, to either set, and so we're
done. And so we can close off this set.
And we know the follow of E consists of
dollar sign and closed paren. And we also
know that X. Has the same set, the same
follow set. Alright, so now let's move on
to the follow of T, All right. So what's
going to be in the follow of T? Well we,
again we have to look at where T is used
in the grammar. So T is used in two
places. The first one is here in the first
production. And so what's going to be in
the follow of T? Well it could be anything
that is in the first of X. Okay? Cuz X
comes immediately after T. And if you
recall from the previous video, there were
only two things in the first of X. One was
plus. So this plus is definitely in the
follow of T and let's just review. [cough]
Excuse me. How that can happen, so we can
go from E. To TX, okay? I'm using the
first production. And now we see the X
comes after the T. And then in one more
step, we can go to T plus E. And now we
have a derivation where plus follows T.
And that's how we, that's, that's Y pluses
in the follow of T. Alright? So the other
thing that was in the first of X was
epsilon, because there's an epsilon
production for X over here. But remember
that we're not interested in, we don't
include epsilon in follow sets. And so X
doesn't contribute anything else, to the,
to the follow of T. But since X can go to
epsilon, remember what that means. That
means that over here, looking back at this
first use of T again in the grammar, this
X can disappear. Right and that means that
anything it is in the follow of E is also
in the follow of T. Now we already know
the follow of E. So we can just add those
things in. Okay? And let me write that
down over here, just so that we don't
forget it. So, to follow. Of, of E is a
subset of the follow of T. We won't really
need this fact again but, useful to write
it down, perhaps. Alright and now we are
done with this use of x. We've included
everything implied by this production that
we can in the follow of T and so now have
to look at the other place where T is used
and that's over here. Okay, and so here
we're going to see that T is in the right
end of a production, so anything that is
in the follow Y can also be in the follow
of T, alright? So the follow of Y. Is
going to be a subset of the follow of T,
alright. So now we can go off and work on
the follow of Y. We have to in order to
figure out what the follow of T is going
to be, we're gonna have to know the follow
of Y. So where is Y used in the grammar?
Well there is only one place and that's
over here. And also Y appears in the right
hand of production which means that the
left hand side symbol it's follow set will
be included in the follow of Y. >> And so
the follow of t will be a subset of the
follow of y. All right? And now again, we
have two follow sets that are subsets of
each other. Follow of y is a subset of
follow of t, and follow of t is a subset
of follow of y. And so these two sets, we
know are going to have to be equal. Okay?
So we can write down here. At the follow
of Y, includes plus, dollar, enclose
parette. Just like the follow of T. And
now we're done. We've, we've, follow of T,
and follow of Y. We've followed all the
implications of, how the follow of T gets
things into, what can be included in the
follow of T. We've worked out all the
places where Y is used in the grammar, and
added all the things that we can, based
on, it's context. And there's nothing more
that we're forced to add either said. So
we can go ahead and close these sets off.
They're finished, Alright. So now We've
done the follow of E, X, T, and Y. So
we've taken care of all the terminal
symbols. But, I'm sorry, All the
non-terminal symbols. But we still need to
compute the follow sets for the terminal
symbols. And unlike the case with first
sets, the follow sets for terminal symbols
can actually be interesting. So let's take
a look, at the follow of open paren. Okay,
what can follow an open paren in a
derivation? Well open paren is only used
in one places. It's here. Okay. And so,
what can follow in open parens is whatever
is in the first of E. And remember that
the first of E, was the same as the first
of T, because T always produces something
in the first position. And the first of T
was what? It was open paren. An int, 'kay?
And if you think about this for a minute,
this makes complete sense. What can come
after an at any valid, at any valid string
in this grammar, while it's going to be
another nested parenthize expression, or
is it going to be an integer. In
particular, you couldn't have a times or a
plus immediately after an and you couldn't
absolutely have the end of the input, you
couldn't have the input stop after an and
have a valid string. So now let's take a
look at the follow of. Okay? So what's in
that set? Again, we look at where the
symbol is used. It's only used here, in
this one production. So and, because it
appears at the right end of the
production, we know that whatever is in
the follow of T is going to be in the
follow of ), all right. And so what was in
the follow of T, [cough], that was +$),
Okay. So, now let's move on and take a
look at the operators. Let's look at the
follow of plus. So where's plus used?
Well, it's only used here. So whatever's
in the first of E is going to be in the
follow of plus. And we already know what
the first of E was. That was an open
[inaudible], An int, Okay. And remember
also that E cannot go to Epsilon. So, E
cannot ever disappear completely because T
always produces at least one terminal.
Therefore, only the things that are in the
first of year in the follow of plus.
Because E can't go to Epsilon, we only
have to include the things that are in the
first of E, in the follow of plus. Again,
if you think about it for a minute this
makes complete sense. What could come
after a plus? Well, it could be an
integer, the second argument to an
addition, or it could be the beginning of
another nested expression. And it couldn't
be a times. It certainly couldn't be the
end of the input cuz you always have to
have an argument after the plus. And, >>
And I think that's it. I think that's all
the other possibilities. >> Okay, Alright.
Now let's take a look at the follow of
times. What can come after a times. Where
is times used, it's used here. So things
that are in the first of t. Are gonna be
in the follow of times again, alright?
[inaudible] we already know what that is.
That's the same as the first of E. That's
open paren and ints. And again, this makes
complete sense. What can come after a
times? It's either the beginning of
another [inaudible] expression or an
integer. It's certainly not a plus or the
end of the input, okay? And again, T
cannot go to epsilon, and so that's the
only thing. Those are the only things that
can be in the follow of times. And now we
just have one more symbol to go. We have
to look at the follow of an integer, of an
int. Okay, where is that used in the
grammar? Well, it's right here, Alright.
So the, what's gonna be in the follow
[inaudible], what 's going to include
everything in the first of Y. Okay. What's
in the first of Y, well times was in the
first of Y, and epsilon was in the first
of Y but remember, we don't include
epsilons in follow sets. So, Y contributes
times to the follow of int. But now,
because Y could go to the epsilon and
epsilon could [inaudible], that means that
this int could wind up being at the right
end of this production. Okay, it could,
the Y could disappear and then whatever
could follow the T could also follow the
int. Right, so we have to include the
things in the follow of T. In the follow
of it, and what was in the follow of T
where that was a plus. It was a dollar.
And it was a close paren, okay? And what
does that tell us? Well it tells us, okay
for most anything to follow an int but as
an open paren cannot follow an int. So you
can't have another nesit expression with
a, begin right after an int without an
intervening operator, Alright? And that
completes the computation of the follow
sets for this example.
